who do you think would win in a race
between me and olympic hundred meter
champion shelly hand praise the price
okay but what if i was given a 10 meter
head start
shelly ann fraser price can run 100
meters in 10.71 seconds
so let's round that down to 10 seconds i
can run 100 meters
in um give me a minute
go
about 20 seconds give or take shelly ann
fraser's price can run 100 meters in 10
seconds
so if i start 10 meters ahead she'll
take one second to catch up to the 10
meter mark
but in that time i'll have run 5 meters
once she's caught up another 5 meters
i'll have run 2.5 meters once she's
caught up that
i'll have run another 1.25 meters and so
on so i'll always be ahead
right well clearly we know that she will
pass me because if we plot
our time and distance from the starting
line on a graph
we can see that there is a point where
she will pass me
at two seconds but does this mean that i
can take an infinite amount of steps in
a finite amount of time
running five meters takes me one second
running 2.5 meters takes me half a
second
running 1.25 meters takes me a quarter
of a second and so on
so this infinite amount of steps takes
me a total of
two seconds a finite amount of time this
is known as a super task
but a super task has a lot of
philosophical problems
in this scenario there's no final step
how do i know that i'm ever going to
cross that 10 meter mark
physicists say that time and space
aren't infinitely divisible
but as we're philosophers we don't care
about real life
let's consider the example of thompson's
lamp suppose a lamp gets switched on
at one minute to noon off at 30 seconds
to noon
on at 15 seconds to noon and so on will
the lamp be on
or off at noon the problem here is
there's no last step
similar to the previous example there's
not enough information for us to know
whether the lamp is going to be on or
off
at the end of the process let's consider
another example
known as the littlewood ross paradox
suppose i have an infinite number of
marbles
each labeled with the numbers 1 to
infinity and
an infinitely large jar in step 1
i add marbles 1 to 10 to the jar and
take away
marble number 1. in step 2 i add numbers
11 to 20 to the jar
and take away marble 2 and so on how
many marbles will be left in the jar
after an infinite number of steps
well because each marble gets taken away
at some point
marble n gets taken away at step n
there's actually
zero marbles left in the jar but what
about if it was slightly different
if for example i took away the tenth
marble at the end of every step
so marble 10 in step one marble 20 and
step two
then every marble that isn't a multiple
of 10 would still be in the jar at the
end of the process
so there would be an infinite number of
marbles left
the problem here is that the question
infinity minus infinity
is not a sensible one that we can ask we
can't ask
what is the infinity of the marbles
going in the jar minus the infinities of
the marble being taken out of the jar
supertasks cause problems not just for
the concept of infinity
they also cause a lot of philosophical
problems let's go over to philosophy
corner to find out more
hello and welcome to philosophy corner
where today we're discussing the
philosophical implications
of super tasks the first issue is time
what does now mean is it a moment well
if it's a moment
does it have length it must have length
to exist
so it must have a beginning moment and
an end moment and there must be
infinitely many moments between it
so the concept of now seems to disappear
with new developments in our
understanding of special relativity
it seems that we do not have an
objective view of time
there isn't so much past present and
future as there are simply events that
are before
and after one another we are just
viewing one slice
of space-time another issue related to
super tasks
is that of explaining what maths is some
philosophers of maths known as
anti-realists
will say that maths isn't real it
doesn't exist in reality but in response
to that others will say
well in order for mathematical
statements to make sense and be
verifiable
they must make reference to something in
reality for example if i say this is a
cube
i'm referencing something in reality and
i can check if my statement is true
so if math doesn't exist what does it
make reference to
well one response to this is that it
makes reference to omega sequences
this is an infinite set of ordered
objects
this doesn't have to exist in our world
but it has to be
possible in some capacity so by studying
super tasks like the examples given
before
we can make a claim about whether or not
it's possible and whether or not this is
a valid explanation
of what maths is super tasks get even
more complicated when we consider
different sizes of infinity
super tasks deal with countably many
tasks hyper tasks deal with uncountably
many tasks and
ultra tasks have one task for every
ordinal number
the concept of infinity has given us
loads of interesting ideas and even more
problems and paradoxes
it will be impossible to discuss all of
them now but i hope this has got you
thinking about humanity's amazing
ability to confuse ourselves
in any case i think i'll leave the
running to the professionals
you